Spring Boot properties extension guide #8186 (#8330)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/spring-boot-properties.adoc

Define this property in your `src/main/resources/application.properties` file:

[source,shell]
----
# Your configuration properties
greeting.text = hello
----

Now modify `GreetingResource` to start using the `GreetingProperties`:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.spring.boot.properties;

import javax.inject.Inject;
import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

@Path("/greeting")
public class GreetingResource {

    @Inject
    GreetingProperties properties;

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String hello() {
        return properties.text;
    }
}
----

Run the tests to verify that application still functions correctly.

== Package and run the application

Run the application with: `./mvnw compile quarkus:dev`.
Open your browser to http://localhost:8080/greeting.

Changing the configuration file is immediately reflected.

As usual, the application can be packaged using `./mvnw clean package` and executed using the `-runner.jar` file.
You can also generate the native executable with `./mvnw clean package -Pnative`.

== Default values

> Now let's add a suffix for a greeting which we'll set to have a default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's add a suffix for a greeting on which we'll set a default value.
```

Author: Maybe "for which"?

Reviewer: Sounds better yeah

    public String suffix = "!";
}
----

And update the `GreetingResource` and its test `GreetingResourceTest`:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.spring.boot.properties;

import javax.inject.Inject;
import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

@Path("/greeting")
public class GreetingResource {

    @Inject
    GreetingProperties properties;

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String hello() {
        return properties.text + properties.suffix;
    }
}
----

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.spring.boot.properties;

import io.quarkus.test.junit.QuarkusTest;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

import static io.restassured.RestAssured.given;
import static org.hamcrest.CoreMatchers.is;

@QuarkusTest
public class GreetingResourceTest {

    @Test
    public void testHelloEndpoint() {
        given()
          .when().get("/greeting")
          .then()
             .statusCode(200)
             .body(is("hello!"));
    }
}
----

Run the tests to verify the change.

== Optional values

Properties with optional values are the middle-ground between standard and properties with default values.

> While a missing property in a configuration file will not cause your application to fail it will neither have a value set to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While a missing property in a configuration file will not cause your application to fail, it will nevertheless not have a value set.
```

> We use java `Optional` type to define such properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use `java.util.Optional` type to define such properties.
```

}
----

And update the `GreetingResource` and its test `GreetingResourceTest`:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.spring.boot.properties;

import javax.inject.Inject;
import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

@Path("/greeting")
public class GreetingResource {

    @Inject
    GreetingProperties properties;

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String hello() {
        return properties.text + ", " + properties.name.orElse("You") + properties.suffix;
    }
}
----

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.spring.boot.properties;

import io.quarkus.test.junit.QuarkusTest;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

import static io.restassured.RestAssured.given;
import static org.hamcrest.CoreMatchers.is;

@QuarkusTest
public class GreetingResourceTest {

    @Test
    public void testHelloEndpoint() {
        given()
          .when().get("/greeting")
          .then()
             .statusCode(200)
             .body(is("hello, You!"));
    }
}
----

Run the tests to verify the change.

== Grouping properties

Now we have three properties in our `GreetingProperties` class.

> While `name` could be considered more of a runtime property (and maybe could be passes as an HTTP query parameter in the future), `text` and `suffix` are used to define a message template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While `name` could be considered more of a runtime property (and maybe could be passed as an HTTP query parameter in the future), `text` and `suffix` are used to define a message template.
```

Let's group these two properties in a separate inner class:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.spring.boot.properties;

import java.util.Optional;

import org.springframework.boot.context.properties.ConfigurationProperties;

@ConfigurationProperties("greeting")
public class GreetingProperties {

    public Message message;

    public Optional<String> name;

    public static class Message {

        public String text;

        public String suffix = "!";
    }
}
----

Here `Message` properties class is defined as an inner class, but it could also be a top level class.

Having such property groups brings more structure to your configuration.
This is especially useful when then number of properties grows.

> Because of an extra layer, our property names have changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of the additional class, our property names have changed.
```
